EGEW 513
Solid and Hazardous Waste
Management
1. Solid Waste - Problem
and Its Management
Dr. Ranjna Jindal
1

Lecture Outline
• Solid Wastes – Definitions
• Impact of Waste
• Magnitude of the Problem
• Current Awareness
• Solid Waste Management (SWM)

2

1.1 Solid Wastes – Definitions
• Solid wastes are the inevitable (unavoidable)
by‑products of life.
• From a general definition point of view, any 'waste'
is an unwanted 'thing' which needs to be disposed
(thrown away).
• Solid wastes are the waste materials in solid state
form.
• These may contain any of the solid substances found
in nature as well as the man‑made (anthropogenic)
3
materials as a result of human activities.

1.1 Solid Wastes – Definitions
• Also, these may or may not be directly usable or
disposable, and may or may not create
environmental pollution and other ecological
disturbances.
• Some of the useful definitions of solid wastes found
in the terminology used in solid waste management
field are as follows:
• Garbage - solid wastes in every day usage.
Sometimes, the term “garbage” is used to mean
4
"food waste," although this usage is not common.

• Refuse - a term often used interchangeably with
solid waste.
• Rubbish - a general term for solid waste,
sometimes to exclude food wastes and ashes.
• Trash - also, a term often used interchangeably
with solid waste, usually meaning paper, rags,
cartons, boxes, wood, furniture, tree branches

5

Municipal Solid Wastes (MSW)
• All solid wastes generated in an area (municipality)
except industrial and agricultural wastes.
• Sometimes defined to mean all solid wastes that a
city authority accepts responsibility for managing in
some way (Figure 1.1).
• This may include construction and demolition
debris, special wastes, and even hazardous wastes to
the extent that they enter the municipal waste
stream.
6

Figure 1.1 Municipal Solid Wastes (MSW)
7

1.2 Impact of Waste
• Problems with the disposal of wastes can be traced
to the ancient times having a history of epidemics
caused by various disease carriers that breed on
decomposing wastes left mindlessly anywhere near
human populations.
• The lack of any plan for the management of solid
wastes had led to the epidemic of plague, the Black
Death, that killed half of the 14th century Europeans
and caused many subsequent epidemics with high
death tolls.
8

• It was not until the 19th century (1800s) that public
health officials became aware that food wastes had
to be collected and disposed of in a sanitary manner
to control rodents and flies, the vectors of disease.
• The relationship between public health and the
improper storage, collection, and disposal of solid
wastes is quite obvious.
• It is well understood that rats, flies, and other
disease vectors breed in open dumps, as well as in
poorly constructed and maintained housing, in food
storage facilities, and in many other places.
9

• The U.S. Public Health Service (USPHS) published
the results of a study tracing the relationship of 22
human diseases to improper solid waste
management.
• Some forms of water and air pollution have also
been attributed to improper management of solid
wastes.
• For instance, liquid from dumps and poorly
engineered landfills has contaminated surface waters
and ground waters.
10

• In mining areas, the liquid leached from waste
dumps may contain toxic elements, such as copper,
arsenic, and uranium.
• Such leaching may contaminate water supplies.
• Although nature has the capacity to dilute, disperse,
degrade, absorb, or otherwise reduce the impact of
unwanted residues in the atmosphere, in waterways,
and on the land, ecological imbalances have
occurred where the natural assimilative capacity has
been exceeded.
11

1.3 Magnitude of the Problem
• Until about 35 years ago, managing solid wastes was
considered to be simply transporting waste to
faraway places and just dumping it on land there
indefinitely for nature to take care of it (Figure 1.2).
• Today, with nearly 7 billions of people on our planet
earth, there is not much space available to
accommodate the dumping of solid wastes that have
multiplied in unthinkable amount.
• Moreover, the nature of the wastes has also changed
so drastically that it is no longer safe for humans and
the environment to just leave the wastes as they are
.
12

Figure 1.2 Solid Wastes Dumped on Land
13

• End products of modern hi‑tech processes in all
walks of life lead to wastes of very complex nature.
• Due to the advancement of human civilization, solid
wastes are no longer simple materials which can
break down into easily degradable substances.
• Other than being extremely non‑degradable they
also include hazardous substances which pose a
constant threat to ourselves and our environment.
• In short, the limited capacity of nature to dilute,
disperse, degrade, absorb or otherwise dispose of
unwanted residues poses problems which only man
can resolve.
14

• Solid waste disposal creates a problem primarily in
highly populated areas.
• The more concentrated the population, the greater
the problem becomes.
• Asian countries, like other developing countries,
have often failed to pay attention to the task of
properly managing the waste generated by them.
• In recent years, the quality of the environment in
most developing countries has deteriorated to a level
at which it can no longer be ignored.
15

• In many cities, particularly in the metropolises of
major developing countries, the traditional solid
waste disposal practices are now beginning to show
signs of no longer functioning properly or working
effectively.
• The Asia‑Pacific region alone contains just over
half of the world's population.
• One of the most pressing problems in the Asian
countries is the lack of proper sanitation and waste
disposal programs.
16

1.4 Current Awareness
• Recently, as the situation in large metropolitan areas
in Asian countries became intolerable, public
officials became painfully aware of the close
interrelationship between pollution control and
public health.
• Consequently, governments in many countries in
cooperation with certain international institutions
began to take steps to implement some pollution
control measures.

• Fortunately, quite a few Asian countries are
recognizing the need for carrying out waste
management programs.
• Furthermore, public officials in these countries
realize the close relationship between waste
management and proper functioning of other
municipal services.
• For instance, in the past, sewerage and drainage
services provided to urban areas ignored the fact
that without a solid waste collection system,
residents of the area would dispose their wastes in
drainage canals and sewers which eventually would
lead to the clogging of the sewers and an
overflowing by the canals.

• At present, although the state of affairs in many
Asian countries still seems rather grim, it is
beginning to improve.
• People in a position to do something are becoming
aware of the dangers and problems of improper
management of solid wastes and of the urgency to
initiate remedial measures.
• Not only are studies and surveys being made, but
courses of action are being drawn up and steps are
being taken to follow them.

1.5 Solid Waste Management (SWM)
• Managing solid wastes includes the activities to make
them harmless to mankind and its environment.
• Solid waste management (SWM) is required to
accomplish:
» reduction in diseases
» a more hygienic, safe and pollution‑free
environment
» cleaner and more comfortable living
conditions, and a higher standard of living and
» optimum utilization of resources.
20

• Solid waste management (SWM) aims at:
» reducing the amount of waste generated at the
source
» recycling the useful materials from the waste and
» treating and disposing the non‑recyclable waste

• The whole process includes:
» the removal of all solid wastes discarded (thrown
away) by the people in a village, town, or city.
» transporting them to a place where treatment
and/or final disposal can be done to eliminate any
potential hazards from the wastes
21

Elements of Solid Waste Management

• From the systems point of view of functional
elements, solid waste management can be visualized
as the discipline associated with: (Figure 1.3)
» identification of solid wastes including:
sources, quantity, and composition;
» on‑site storage;
» collection;
» transfer and transportation;
» reduction, reuse and recycling (RRR);
» intermediate treatment; and
» final disposal.

22

23

Figure 1.3 Functional Elements of Solid Waste Management

• One of the objectives of the solid waste
management is to optimize these functional
elements to provide the most efficient and
economic practices in accordance with the socioeconomic, environmental, technological and
political constraints.
• By considering each element separately it is
possible to identify the fundamental aspects and
relationships involved in each element, and to
develop, wherever possible, quantifiable
relationships for the purposes of making
engineering comparisons, analysis and evaluation.

