EGWR 513
Solid and Hazardous Waste
Management
5. Separation - Recycling, Recovery
and Reuse (RRR) of Solid Wastes
Dr. Ranjna Jindal
1

Lecture Outline
• Waste Recycling
• Recovery Processes
• Options for Recovery and Reuse
– Types Of Materials Recovered From MSW
– Materials Commonly Separated from MSW

•
•
•
•
•

Future Changes in Waste Composition
Waste Recycling in Asian Countries
Recycling Biodegradable Wastes
Recycling Non-biodegradable Wastes
Waste Recovery Practices in Some Asian Countries
2

5.1 Waste Recycling
• Waste recycling is one of the most important component
of a "Waste Management System."
• Also used synonymously are the terms reclamation,
recovery and reuse of wastes.
• Although these terms may have different interpretations
in different contexts, they have the same meaning or
rather same goal in waste management.
• In a simplest way, waste recycling or reclamation means
to make some reuse of recovered waste materials or in
other words, to retain the remaining values in wastes.
Recycling = Reclamation

=

Recovery + Reuse

3

• Reclamation from waste is, of course, not a new idea, either
in developed or developing countries.
• Man has always attempted to reclaim usable materials from
waste in many diverse ways, whenever it seemed attractive
and advantageous to do so.
• However, recovery from wastes attracted a growing interest
during the past 20-25 years or so, particularly from the
government sectors.

4

• Two main reasons for this are as follows:
i) The continuing growth in the waste generation rates which
poses serious problems to man and its environment and it has
become impossible to get rid of these amounts of wastes.
ii) A growing awareness about the fact that primary or virgin
resources in nature are in finite (limited) supply, and also
recent sharp increases in the price of energy and some other
natural resources.

• The ultimate goal of solid waste management should be to
conserve resources including the space which the wastes
would otherwise pollute.
• This can only be achieved through appropriate waste
recycling by utilization of waste matters and their byproducts (materials and energy) for the betterment of the
environment.
5

5.2 Recovery Processes
• The waste recovery processes may be, in principle,
subdivided into:
» materials separation; and
» materials conversion.

5.2.1 Materials Separation
• The object of recovery by materials separation is the
sorting of the groups of materials contained in the waste
mixture without changing their physical and chemical
properties; and the reclamation of the fractions so
obtained as secondary raw materials or sources of energy
e.g., solid fuels.
6

• There are two principal approaches for achieving this:
1) Separate collection
2) Materials separation through sorting after collection

1) Separate Collection
• Materials separation at the place of origin (source) ‑ can be
done in following manners:
– The users separate selected groups of materials in their own homes
and prepare them:
• for separate collection as in house to house (door to door) collection
system,
• or sells them to private hawkers.

– The users separate selected groups of materials at homes and take
them to recovery centers with centrally based collection containers.
7

2) Materials Separation Through Sorting After Collection
• Takes place, after conventional collection, at central plants
by:
» manual selection
» and/or processes of mechanical treatment.

• The processing scheme selected depends on whether:
‑The target products are secondary raw materials
(paper, cardboard, glass, metals, and plastics etc.), or
‑ fine particled or densified fuel can be made from refuse.
• Processes for waste recovered by materials separation have
been developed all over the world and can already claim an
advanced standard of technology.
8

5.2.2 Materials Conversion
• The object of waste reclamation by materials conversion is
the recovery of the useful products through transformation
‑ in solid, liquid, or gaseous form and their reuse as raw
materials or sources of energy as well as the harnessing of
energy released during transformation.
• The following principal process methods are known:
1) Thermal conversion ‑ degasification (pyrolysis) and gasification.
2) Bio‑technical and chemical conversion ‑ fermentation,
hydrolysis,
and biogas processes.

• Of this group of processes for recovery by materials
conversion, only pyrolysis has acquired any significance for
municipal wastes as yet
9

5.3 Options for Recovery and Reuse
Materials Commonly Separated from MSW
• Materials that have been generally separated for recycling in
USA during the past decade are reported in Table 5.1.
• The most common ones from MSW are aluminum, paper,
plastics, glass, ferrous metal, nonferrous metal, yard wastes,
and construction and demolition wastes.
• Each is considered briefly in the following discussion.

10

Table 5.1 Materials that have been recovered for recycling from MSW in
USA
Recyclable material
Aluminum

Types of materials or uses
Soft drink and beer cans

Paper
Old newspaper (ONP)

Newsstand and home-delivered newspaper

Corrugated cardboard

Bulk packaging; largest single source of waste paper for recycling

High-grade paper

Computer paper, white ledger paper, and trim cuttings

Mixed paper

Various mixtures of clean paper, including newsprint, magazines, and
white and colored long-fiber paper

Plastics
Polyethylene terephthalate (PETE/1)

Soft drink bottles, salad dressing and vegetable oil bottles;
photographic film

High-density polyethylene (HDPE/2)

Milk jugs, water containers, detergent and cooking oil bottles

Polyvinyl chloride (PVC/3)

Home landscaping irrigation piping, some food packaging, and Bottles

Low-density polyethylene (LDPE/4)

Thin-film packaging and wrap; dry cleaning film bags; other film
Material

Polypropylene (PP/5)

Closures and labels for bottles and containers, battery casings, bread
and cheese wraps, cereal box liners

Polystyrene (PS/6)

Packaging for electronic and electrical components, foam cups, fast
food containers, tableware and microwave plates

Multilayer and other (7)

Multi layered packaging, ketchup and mustard bottles

Mixed plastics

Various combinations of the above products

11

Table 5.1 (contd.)

Materials that have been recovered for recycling from
MSW in USA

Recyclable material

Types of materials or uses

Glass

Clear, green, and brown glass bottles and containers

Ferrous metal

Tin cans, white goods, and other metals

Nonferrous metals

Aluminum, copper, lead, etc.

Yard wastes, collected separately

Used to prepare compost; biomass fuel; intermediate landfill
cover

Organic fraction of MSW

Used to prepare compost for soil applications; compost for use as
intermediate landfill cover; methane; ethanol and other organic
compounds; refuse-derived fuel (RDF)

Construction and demolition wastes

Soil, asphalt, concrete, wood, drywall, shingles, metals

Wood

Packing materials, pallets, scraps, and used wood from
construction projects

Waste oil

Automobile and truck oil; reprocessed for reuse of fuel

Tires

Automobile and truck tires; road building material; fuel

Lead-acid batteries

Automobile and truck batteries; shredded to recover individual
components such as acid, plastic, and lead

Household batteries

Potential recovery of zinc, mercury, and silver
12

Aluminum
• Aluminum recycling is made up of two sectors: aluminum
cans and secondary aluminum.
• Secondary aluminum includes window frames, storm
doors, and gutters.
• The demand for recycled aluminum cans is high, as it takes
95 percent less energy to produce an aluminum can from
an existing can than from ore.
Paper
• The principal types of waste paper that are recycled are old
newspaper, cardboard, high-grade paper, and mixed paper.
13

• Each of these four grades consists of individual grades,
which are defined according to the type of fiber, source,
homogeneity, extent of printing, and physical or chemical
characteristics.
• High grade paper includes office paper, computer printout,
and other grades having a high percentage of long fibers.
• Mixed grades include paper with high ground-wood
content, such as magazines; coated paper; and individual
grades containing excessive percentages of “out throws”
(papers of lower grades than the grade specified).
• The types of paper found in residential solid waste in USA
before the removal of newspapers or other papers for
recycling are reported in Table 5.2.
14

Table 5.2

Percentage distribution of paper types found in residential solid
waste in USA

Type of paper
Newspaper
Books and magazines
Commercial printing
Office paper
Other paperboard
Paper packaging
Other non-packaging paper
Tissue paper and towels
Corrugated materials
Total

Percent by weight
Range
10-20
5-10
4-8
8-12
8-12
6-10
8-12
6-8
20-25

Typical
17.7
8.7
6.4
10.1
10.1
7.8
10.6
5.9
22.7
100.0

15

Plastics
• Plastics can be classified into two general categories: clean
commercial grade scrap and post-consumer scrap.
• The two types of post-consumer plastics that are now most
commonly recycled are polyethylene terephthalate
(PETE/1), which is used for the manufacture of soft drink
bottles, and high-density polyethylene (HDPE/2), used for
milk and water containers and detergent bottles.
• In 1987, more than 150 million pounds of plastic soft drink
bottles were recycled in USA.
• Even so, less than five percent of the available scrap plastic
is being recycled.
16

• It is anticipated that all of the other types of plastics will be
recycled in greater quantities in the future, however, as
processing technologies improve.
Glass
• Glass is also a commonly recycled material. Container
glass (for food and beverage packing), flat glass (e.g.,
window glass), and pressed or amber and green glass are
the three principal types of glass found in MSW.
• Glass to be reprocessed is often separated by color into
categories of clear, green, and amber.

17

Ferrous Metals (Iron and Steel)
• The largest amount of recycled steel has traditionally come
from large items such as cars and appliances.
• Many communities have large scrap metal piles at the local
landfill or transfer station.
• In many cases, the piles are unorganized and different metals
are mixed together, making them unattractive to scrap metal
buyers.
• Steel cans recycling is also becoming more popular.
• Steel cans, used as juice, soft drink, and food containers, are
easily separated from mixed recyclables or municipal solid
waste using large magnets (which also separate other ferrous
metals).
18

Nonferrous Metals
• Recyclable nonferrous metals are recovered:
» from common household items (outdoor furniture,
kitchen cookware and appliances, ladders,tools,
hardware);
» from construction and demolition projects (copper wire,
pipe and plumbing supplies, light fixtures, aluminum
siding, gutters and downspouts, doors, windows); and
» from large consumer, commercial, and industrial
products (appliances, automobiles, boats, trucks,
aircraft, machinery).

19

Yard Wastes Collected Separately
• In most communities yard wastes are collected separately.
• The composting of yard wastes has become of great
interest as cities and towns seek to find ways in which to
achieve mandated diversion goals.
• Leaves, grass clippings, bush clippings, and brush are the
most commonly composted yard wastes.
• Stumps and wood are also compostable, but only after
they have been chipped to produce a smaller more
uniform size.
20

Construction and Demolition Wastes
• In many locations construction and demolition (C&D)
wastes are now being processed to recover marketable
items such as wood chips for use as a fuel in biomass
combustion facilities, aggregate for concrete in
construction projects, ferrous and nonferrous metals for
remanufacture, and soil for use as fill material.
• The reprocessing of C&D wastes is gaining in popularity
as disposal fees of landfills continue to increase.

21

5.4 Future Changes in Waste Composition
• In terms of solid waste management planning, knowledge of
future trends in the composition of solid wastes is of great
importance.
• For example, if a paper recycling program were instituted
on the basis of current distribution data and if paper
production were subsequently eliminated, such a program
would more than likely become a costly white elephant.
• Although this case is extreme, it nevertheless illustrates the
point that future trends must be assessed carefully in longterm planning.
• Another important question is whether the quantities are
actually changing or only the reporting system has
improved.
22

Future Changes in Waste Components
• In planning for future waste management systems, it will be
important to consider the changes that may occur in the
composition of solid waste with time.
• Four waste components that have an important influence on the
composition of the wastes collected are food waste, paper and
cardboard, yard waste, and plastics.
• For the purposes of comparison, the classification of materials
used to define municipal refuse in the early 1900s is given in
Table 5.3.
• In comparing the entries in Table 5.3 with those in Table 5.3,
public refuse corresponds to waste from municipal sources,
trade and market refuse corresponds to wastes from
23
commercial sources.

Table 5.3 Classification of Refuse Materials in USA in the early 1900s

24

Table 5.3 Sources of Solid Wastes Within a Community
Source

Typical Facilities, Activities,
or Locations Where Wastes
are Generated

Types of Solid Wastes

Residential

Single family and multifamily
detached dwellings, low-,
medium-, and high-rise
apartment, etc.

Food wastes, paper, cardboard, plastics,
textiles, leather, yard wastes, wood,
glass, tin cans, aluminum, other metals,
ashes, street leaves, special wastes
(including bulky items, consumer
electronics, white goods, yard wastes
collected separately, batteries, oil, and
tires), household hazardous wastes

Commercial

Stores, restaurants, markets,
office building, hotels, motels,
print shops, service stations, auto
repair shops etc.

Paper, cardboard, plastics, wood, food
wastes, glass, metals, special wastes (see
above), hazardous wastes, etc.

Institutional

Schools , hospitals, prisons,
governmental centers

As above in commercial

Construction and
Demolition

New construction sites, road
repair/renovation sites, razing of
buildings, broken pavement

Wood, steel, concrete, dirt, etc.

Table 5.3 Sources of Solid Wastes Within a Community (Cont.)
Source
Municipal services
(excluding treatment
facilities)

Typical Facilities, Activities,
or Locations Where Wastes
are Generated
Street cleaning, landscaping,
catch basin cleaning, parks and
beaches, other recreational areas

Types of Solid Wastes
Special wastes, rubbish, street
sweepings, landscape and tree
trimmings, catch basin debris,
general wastes from parks, beaches,
and recreational areas

Treatment plant sites; Water, wastewater, and industrial
municipal incinerators treatment processes, etc.

Treatment plant wastes, principally
composed of residual sludges

Municipal solid waste

All of the above

All of the above

Industrial

Construction, fabrication, light
and heavy manufacturing,
refineries, chemical plants, power
plants, demolition, etc.

Industrial process wastes, scrap
materials, etc. Non-industrial
wastes including food wastes,
rubbish, ashes, demolition and
construction wastes, special wastes,
hazardous wastes

Agricultural

Field and row crops, orchards,
vineyards, dairies, feedlots, farms,
etc.

Spoiled food wastes, agricultural
wastes, rubbish, hazardous wastes

• Stable refuse has disappeared as a waste category in current
classification systems, while plastics were nonexistent in the
early 1900s.
Food Wastes
• The quantity of residential food wastes collected has
changed significantly over the years world wide as a result of
technical advances and changes in public attitude.
• Two technological advances that have had a significant effect
are the development of the food processing and packaging
industry and the use of kitchen food waste grinders in
western countries.
• The percentage of food waste by weight in American MSW,
had decreased from about 14 percent in the early 1960s to
about 9 percent in 1992 and then increased to 12.7% in 2008.
27

• Recently, because the public has become more
environmentally aware and concerned, a trend has developed
toward the use of more raw, rather than processed, vegetables.
Paper and Cardboard
• The percentage of paper and cardboard (also known as
paperboard and corrugated paper) found in municipal solid
wastes in USA had increased greatly over the past half
century, rising from about 20 percent in the early 1940s to
about 40 percent in 1992 and then dropped to about 31%
around 2008.
• It is expected that use of paper and cardboard will remain
stable for the next few years.

28

Yard Wastes
• The percentage of yard wastes in MSW around USA has
also increased significantly during the past quarter century,
primarily due to passage of laws that prohibit burning of
yard wastes.
• By weight, yard waste currently accounts for about 14 to 24
percent of the waste stream.
• Environmental conditions such as droughts have also
affected the quantities of yard wastes collected in certain
locations.

29

Plastics
• The percentage of plastics in solid wastes world wide has
also increased significantly during the past 50 years.
• The use of plastic in USA had increased from almost non
measurable quantities in the early 1940s to between 7 and 8
percent, by weight, in 1992 and to 12% by 2008.
• It is anticipated the use of plastics will continue to increase,
but at a slower rate than during the past 30 years.

30

5.5 Waste Recycling in Asian Countries
• Waste recycling in Asian countries is primarily based on
materials separation.
• It is a paradox that whilst developed western countries
experiment and evaluate on the desirability of the 'refuse
recycling' and 'reclamation', this is practiced to a very high
degree in the poorer parts of the developing world.
• Assessment of the scope of recycling as part of any national
waste disposal plan is now being propagated in many Asian
countries.
• It has also been realized that no matter how well-thoughtout a city or country's waste management program is, if
there is not equal emphasis on recycling and resource
31
recovery, the battle will be lost.

• Household recycling of waste is widely practiced in the
Asian region.
• However, in most Asian metropolises, except those in Japan,
Singapore, and China, recycling activities are conducted in
a rather informal, unorganized way, primarily by waste
pickers or "scavengers", either at the time of collection or at
the dump sites.
• Waste recycling practiced in Asia is mainly by four
methods:
» scavenging,
» informal waste recycling,
» recovery centers, and
» resource recovery processes.
32

1) Scavenging
• The practice of manually recovering reusable materials from
municipal solid wastes in Asian countries is not only
common, in many cases, it is a way of life.
• Scavenging occurs at various stages of the overall waste
management system.
• Although through informal sectors, it is very well
established.
• Among the many types of scavengers are the "itinerant
scavengers" who roam the streets looking for discards that
can be resold.
• Scavenging may occur at various stages of waste
management systems.

33

(i) Scavenging at Source
• In Asian households, people generally do not discard
papers, plastics, metal, glass, bottles etc. and instead sell
these to the trader scavengers who collect them from the
residences, shops, and even factories.
• The itinerant scavengers use push carts, tricycles, or other
vehicles for the reusable materials.
• Some of these scavengers are independent, small‑scale
operators and specialize in collecting one or two materials,
while others work for some "middle man" or some
industries.
• Sometimes the middle man provides them with both money
34
and vehicle.

• As these "itinerant collectors" walk the streets with their
gunny sacks, hand-carts or bicycle‑carts and vans, they
usually ring a bell or cry out.
• Because these buyers obtain wastes at the source before
they are mixed, damaged, and contaminated, they are key
players in the Asian recovery systems.
• Expansion and modernization of cities, however, makes it
difficult for door‑to‑door collectors to work.
(ii) Scavenging During Waste Collection
• On occasions, a refuse collection crew may incorporate its
regular collection with some scavenging.
• In Asian cities, the scavengers are aided by the extensive
use of communal storage of waste before being collected.
35

• This, occurring in a variety of waste storage receptacles e.g.
bins, oil drums, concrete drainage pipes and purpose‑built
ground drums, allows an excellent opportunity for hand
sorting and recovery and is carried out very efficiently.

(iii) Scavenging at Disposal Site
• Another form of scavenging takes place at the disposal sites.
• These scavengers generally belong to the urban poor living
in nearby slums, squatter areas, or even at the dump site
itself.
• Often whole families of scavengers support themselves
living on landfill sites and dumps and little of value is thrown
away.
36

• Bottles, tins and a variety of other things have several life
uses.
• These people play an important role in recovering resources
from the wastes as well as reducing the waste volume to be
ultimately disposed of.
• However, in the eyes of city managers and public cleansing
people, these scavengers are usually considered a nuisance
because they hinder collection and dumping operations at a
disposal site by trying to reach the waste during unloading
operations.
• As a result, many municipalities tend to prohibit the access
of these people to the dump sites.
37

• The overall acceptance of scavenging in modern
society still remains to be determined.
• There are those who are totally against scavenging
of any kind; where as some others praise the
scavengers' activities.
• Regardless of this range of attitudes, the fact is that
in most developing countries, scavenging is an
important element in the economic survival for
many industries.
• For example, there are several countries in which
the steel, paper, and glass industries are highly, if
not completely, dependent on recycled products.
38

• Some cities like Seoul, after having recognized the
importance of the pickers' role in reducing waste as well as
in helping various industries with recycled resources, have
formally agreed with scavengers to let them in and work at
the dump site within certain limited times and sections.
• In 1987, the Municipal Authority of Seoul is reported to
have constructed barracks with a water supply and
electricity for pickers and scavengers at the Hangang River
dump site of Nanjido.
• In Nepal an innovative experiment is being tried where the
waste pickers are allowed to operate at a specific site only.
• This is expected to avoid scattering of waste at the site and
help maintain a check on their activities and health.
39

2) Informal Waste Recycling
• Until a few years ago very little was known about informal
separation and recovery of wastes in Asian cities.
• However, in most Asian cities such informal activities are
responsible for more waste recovery and recycling than any
of the formally sanctioned activities like compost making in
a municipal plant.
• An estimated reduction in refuse quantities by a third is
accomplished through the pickers in Indonesian cities.
• Informal waste recovery activities may be highly organized.

40

• For instance, industries needing wastes as raw materials
may initiate and control:
» systems of collection,
» transportation, and
» partial processing.

• The first such system for modern industry in India was
the organization of rag pickers to supply rags to the paper
mills of Calcutta in the mid 19 th century.
• Similarly, there have always been individuals who
combed garbage dumps in Chinese cities.
• In the past there were few such people and they were
usually old.
• Recently, a substantial informal recovery sector has
emerged in China.

41

• All the mops in China are made of strips of rags.
• Also, as plastics and bottles are appearing at dumps, pickers
are to be found in greater numbers there.
• In Beijing in 1988, there was even a small colony of
squatters on one dump who specialized in the recovery of
plastics.
• Some Chinese officials have expressed concern about street
and dump scavengers.
• Although, their work is recognized as useful to the economy
but is considered problematic for public health and social
order.
42

• In Malaysia during the oil boom years in mid 1980s,
appearance of great quantities of recyclable wastes at the
dumps, attracted many pickers and middlemen to the dump
sites.

43

3) Recovery Centers
• In attempts to solve the problems of informal waste
recovery practices, some Asian cities' governments have
come up with the idea of organized waste recovery centers
controlled by the municipalities or sub‑contracted to
private firms.
• A recovery center is a facility that will receive, store, and
sometimes process specific wastes from domestic
consumers and/or industry for later reuse.
• Such centers can range:
– from the simple skip placed temporarily in a supermarket, which
seeks to recover small quantities of low value materials, e.g.
glass containers,
– to the large, permanent center incorporating one or more
44
processes for treating a variety of recovered materials.

• The main advantages of a recovery center are:
– a recoverable material is prevented from entering a
mixed or contaminated waste stream;
– the costs of delivery to the center do not normally form
part of the costs of recovery.
• The viability of recovery centers is generally hindered by:
– the difficulty of maintaining a high level of public
responses;
– the low value of the wastes recovered, and
– the problems of securing a stable market for the
reclaimed materials.
45

4) Sophisticated Recovery Processes
• In addition to the "informal " methods of resource recovery
practiced in most Asian countries, some municipalities seem
to be inclined to implement recovery processes similar to
those used in the developed Western countries.
• A variety of processes have been developed and
implemented in Europe and the USA for physical removal
of useful or valuable materials from household and similar
solid wastes.

46

• The materials recovered vary from process to process, but
typically include:
» a fiber product consisting largely of paper, board and
some textiles;
» ferrous metals; and
» a mixed organic fraction consisting of vegetable and
putrescible matter.

• Further processing steps, particularly practiced in the USA,
aim to recover non‑ferrous metals e.g. aluminum, and glass.
• The state of development of household refuse sorting plants
for recovery of reusable items, and sophisticated materials
conversion processes e.g. highly complex composting
techniques, is still in the initial phase in Asia.
47

• Several reasons coming in the path of successful waste
recovery include:
– All of these processes suffer to some extent from substantial
fluctuations in quantities and characteristics of the waste,
principally composition, density, and moisture content.
– Highly sophisticated and complex technologies involved in these
processes lead to very high costs.
– The materials recovered by these processes are generally of low
grade and often need further treatment before they can be
marketed.

48

5.6 Recycling Biodegradable Wastes
Natural Composting of Municipal Refuse
• Compost making from the municipal refuse has become
somewhat controversial.
• Nevertheless, the interest in composting of urban biowastes
persists, simply because it seems to offer the only feasible
way to substantially reduce refuse volumes at dump sites.
• And in some cases, city officials still dream of making
money from compost sales.
• However, in contrast to the "high technology" approach,
advocates of appropriate technology do not start with the
design of complex compost making facilities.
49

• Instead they assess the situation, evaluate the most feasible
option, and further promote community‑based approaches
to composting.

China
• Chinese cities have made extensive use of city refuse for
urban fringe agriculture.
• Largest city to dispose of considerable quantities of
domestic solid wastes through farming is Shanghai.
• In traditional practice, refuse is carried out to farms on
barges along the rivers and canals, and in the suburbs is
off‑loaded on the land to decompose.
• The composted material is then sifted through screens.50

• Unfortunately, subsidies of chemical fertilizers to farmers
in the region, a growing distaste for the odors of
decomposing wastes, and dissatisfaction with the amount
of synthetic material and glass in the waste, have led
many farmers to reject the city's wastes in recent years.
• As a result the surplus had to be dumped along the sides
of the canals.
• Due to the problems of finding more space for refuse
dumps, Shanghai city government built a small compost
plant with the aim of making superior compost, but as yet
the marketing potential of the compost produced from
this plant has not been studied.
51

• At present, several Chinese cities e.g. Beijing and Shanghai
are developing somewhat more elaborate systems where
wastes are fermented in chambers and latter the residues are
mechanically sifted to refine the compost and make it more
attractive to the farmers.

India and Nepal
• The single largest and most economical natural system of
using city refuse for farming is that of the garbage farms of
East Calcutta in India.
• As there the wastes are predominantly used in 'situ', the
costs and complications of transportation are avoided.
• At Calcutta's main dumping site, established in 1865, the
municipal corporation leases out plots of mature dumping
land, amounting to 800 hectares, for vegetable farming.52

• Twenty five varieties of vegetables are grown throughout
the year, at an average rate of 150‑300 ton per day, without
the addition of chemical fertilizers.
• Even nearby farmers look for the prized fresh refuse and
make arrangements with refuse truck drivers to obtain
consignments before the trucks reach the dump.
• This intensive farming provide employment to an estimated
20,000 people.
• In this system of garbage farming there are no marketing
and transportation costs, factors which have been handicaps
for municipal plants in other larger cities.
• Furthermore, since even broken glass and small pieces of
hard plastic are retrieved from Calcutta's garbage, such
53
materials are not yet a problem for the garbage farms.

• Other satisfactory compost systems in South Asian cities are
based on "low technology" windrow systems, where refuse
is piled and turned by front‑loading bulldozers.
• These compost plants even accommodate the waste pickers
to retrieve all possible materials.
• In Kathmandu and Bangalore, pickers are allowed to
scavenge from the windrows, and this is not seen as
interfering with plant operations.
• In New Delhi, they are permitted access to the plant's
conveyor belt.

54

Indonesia
• In 1988, the Ragunan Zoo in Jakarta set up a simple
composting system that combines zoo waste with domestic
waste from nearby neighborhood, at a site off the zoo
grounds. Recyclables are gathered by pickers.
• The waste is mounded, watered, and turned for 11 days.
• It is then packed into wooden frames and blocked.
• After a few days, the compost is ready for packaging and is
even sold in supermarkets.
• The system successfully recycles 30‑40 m3 of zoo waste
and a further 70 m3 of domestic waste.
• This compost is particularly desired for golf courses.

55

Problems with Urban Biowaste Composting
• One important fact not to be overlooked at this point is that
the viability of these natural and small‑scale refuse
composting systems is highly dependent on the extensive
retrieval of recyclables and other problematic materials.
• The most immediate problematic material threatening the
refuse composting in Asian cities may be the prolification of
thin plastic bags.
• In the last two decades, use of plastic bags for packaging
and carrying goods has exploded in Asian cities and towns.
• Although plastic bags recycling also takes place, the waste
pickers get very little money for dirty, low‑grade plastic, so
they prefer to concentrate on hard plastic and other larger
56
objects.

• These small plastic bags, when not retrieved in sufficient
numbers, begin to affect the quality of the compost.
• Broken glass and fragments of other manufactured
materials are also growing problems causing farmers cut
their hands and feet while working on the land.
• With mechanical compost plants also, these can cause
operational problems or even complete breakdowns.
• Lately audio and video tapes in urban solid wastes are also
bringing machines in composting plants to a stop.
• In cities where wastes remain relatively uncontaminated
with hazardous refuse, broken glass, and excessive amounts
of plastic, compost making can still ensure that maximum
use is made of the organic residues.
57

5.7 Recycling of Non-biodegradable Wastes
Plastic Waste Recycling
• Plastics represent one of the toughest waste
recycling problems.
• To start with, Asian consumers at present create a far higher
proportion of plastic waste than in European and American
countries.
• While plastics account for only 7% of the US solid waste
stream, the corresponding shares for Hong Kong and
Taiwan are 20% and 17%, respectively.
• The reason for this is the passion for "convenience".

58

• This also explains why plastic makes up half of all Hong
Kong's floating refuse in its Victoria Harbor.
• This floating refuse costs the Hong Kong government
HK$1,000 (US$128) a ton to collect, compared with just
HK$350 (US$45) for refuse collection on land.
• Retrieving this plastic from the waterways and landfill
sites and converting them into reusable form is no easy
matter.
• It is far more easier to sort, melt down, and recycle paper
and metals e.g. aluminum and steel.
• Although, Hong Kong already has a thriving export trade
in recycled waste materials (1.15 million tons of waste was
59
recycled in 1990).

• In 1988, Hong Kong exported HK$2.17 billion (US$.27
billion) worth of waste paper and metals.
• Plastics, on the other hand, are not so easily dealt with.
• They comprise a dozen different polymers in different
shapes and several colors, often contaminated with other
wastes.
• While some mixed plastics may be melted down into
reusable pellets or flakes, the product would be more
valuable if separated by resin and color.
• However, large‑scale separation requires sophisticated
and expensive techniques.
60

• Asian countries have been slow to catch on the commercial
and industrial potential of recycling plastics due to a variety
of reasons.
• But now some western companies are exploring this in Asia.
• One Swiss company, Orfa Recycling Asia, has already set
up a small plastic recycling plant in Hong Kong's New
Territories.
• At the moment, the main emphasis is on developing a
market for this company's plastic "superwood", which can
be molded into planks, posts, and traffic markers, along with
a some other applications.
61

• Some people are hoping that technology will come to the
rescue in the form of new‑found degradable plastics now
being developed in Europe and the US.
• These ingenious mixture of polymers and starch or wood
fiber may break down in as little as one or two years
according to their promoters.
• Yet degradable plastics are far from solving today's plastic
problem.

62

• In Taiwan, the problematic plastic waste shows up in the
rapid prolification of polyethylene terephalate (PET) soda
bottles ‑ from virtually nil 30 years ago to 250 million
bottles in 1988.
• Few years ago, one project was already underway in Taipei
for PET bottle recycling.
• Taiwan Recycling Co. was building a NT$200 million
recycling plant in northern Taiwan.
• The facility was supposed to handle 7,500 tons of PET
bottles a year (total consumption of PET bottles in 1988 was
12,000 tons).
• The plant aimed to produce both flaked and pelletized PET,
which it could sell to synthetic fiber making and plastic
63
packaging film manufacturers, respectively.

Waste Reduction and Recycling of Paper
• Paper/cardboard is one of the common recyclable item that
is reused in many ways after recovering it from the general
refuse in Asian countries.
• Separate storage of old newspapers and magazines in
households and selling them to door-to-door waste buyers is
an old practice for the Asian housewives.
• In the modern age of personal computers, paper waste in
offices and businesses has increased manifolds in last 3
decades.
• Similarly, commercial paper/cardboard waste has also
increased tremendously throughout the Asian countries.64

• Therefore, recycling and reuse of waste paper/cardboard is
not only important for waste reduction but also for their
economic value in reusing them in various ways.
• In Bangkok, Jakarta, and Hong Kong there are some very
large industries dealing entirely recyclables, such as paper.
• In Singapore, although waste materials recycled are largely
from industry and commerce, waste paper/cardboard is
collected from households and is considered commercially
viable.
• The Ministry of the Environment encourages private
enterprises to set up recycling plants on land set aside at a
closed dumping site, however there is little or no direct
financial support from the government.
65

• In China and Vietnam, waste recovery and recycling is
organized at the city level and supported by national
ministries.
• In major cities of China, there are large recovery companies
which collect recyclables including paper/cardboard from
offices, institutions, etc.
• Also, there are neighborhood redemption centers where
people can sell recyclable waste items, such as paper.
• However, these centers prefer to deal with more profitable
materials, such as metals.

66

5.8 Waste Recovery Practices in Some Asian
Countries
Taiwan
• According to Taiwan's Bureau of Solid Waste Control‑
EPA, more than 40% of its refuse could be recovered.
• Their aim has been to promote the waste reduction and
resource recovery policy to achieve the target of 14% trash
volume reduction and 35% of recovery within few years.
• Taiwan's EPA had chosen 17 items to be recovered from
solid wastes and has set laws to manage and supervise the
manufacturers' responsibility in the recovery system
including cleaning and treatment of refuse.
67

Japan
• Japan is the only country in Asia which has promoted and
practiced an extremely well organized and successful
"waste recycling program".
• One major reason, probably, is the realization of the fact
that natural resources are scarce in Japan.
• Therefore, just disposing of "garbage" containing large
amounts of useful materials and resources would be
doubly expensive.
• So, in an effort to conserve precious resources, as well as
to cut down the treatment and disposal costs through
reduction in quantities, the Clean Japan Center was
68
established.

• Mainly two modes of recycling are practiced in Japanese
cities and towns:
1) sorted collection, and
2) group collection.

• Many local governments in Japan practice sorted collection
of household refuse.
• Initially it was intended for enhancing the efficiency of
incineration by sorting refuse into "combustibles" and
"incombustibles".
• Sorted collection is sometimes done by the individuals
visiting neighborhoods to recover old newspapers,
magazines, and rags from households in exchange of new
toilet or tissue paper.
69

• The second form of collection is voluntary group effort by
community residents, in which each household keeps
materials that can be recycled and carries these items to a
designated place on a designated day, to be sold to a recycle
business.
• Group collection practice is done through some civic group
e.g. town association, housewives' association, senior
citizens' association, PTA, or even children's association etc.
• The money earned by selling recovered items is received by
the group itself as a fruit of cooperation, to be effectively
used as the management expense of the group or for
contribution to any welfare scheme.
70

• Since this form of separate collection for resource recovery
is more effective in reducing the quantity of refuse, many
local governments are now extending guidance, assistance,
and aids to various civic groups.
• In addition, various methods for making "reutilization" of
usable items from household refuse, are practiced in Japan.
Some of the present practices include:
1) recycle shops,
2) garage sales, and
3) exchange of uselful things.

71

Recycle Shops
• Recently one can see an increased number of shops along
the streets who sell the recycled things.
• Unlike shops selling secondhand articles or curios, these
shops mainly deal in clothing, accessories, etc. with
designers' and characters' brands popular among the young.
Garage Sales
• The original meaning of garage sale is to sell the old
furniture, clothing, books, toys, and other household items
due to house‑moving, repurchasing etc., at low prices in
the garage of the seller.
• Now‑a‑days, a large‑scale "flea market" is held in a park,
etc. in different districts for exchanging and selling the
unwanted things among a group by each member carrying
in the items in cars.
72

Exchange of Useful Things
• Exchange of unwanted things e.g. notice boards, telephones,
etc. is practiced by the consumer administration sections as
well as private organizations.
Industrial Wastes Recycling
• Among the recycling methods used in the industrial circles,
some are:
» "in‑house reutilization",
» "waste exchange systems", etc.

73

In‑house Reutilization
• The "Waste Management Law" in Japan, which prescribes
the responsibility of the waste disposal on the manufacturer,
also recommends to reduce the wastes by reutilization, etc.
• This means that the waste or unwanted by‑products
generated in a factory must be reutilized as raw materials or
energy sources within the company itself.
• This concept of a "closed system" is expected to be effective
in decreasing the load of wastes on to environment, thus
preventing industrial waste pollution.
• At present this approach is widely used in the industrial
sector in Japan.
74

• In 1987, an estimated 109,644 tons of aluminum in the form
of 5,482 million cans was consumed in Japan.
• Of this, 45,498 tons (about 2,275 million cans) were
recovered and reutilized.
• This accounted for a recovery rate of 41.5%.
• Also, as the energy consumption required for reproducing
metal aluminum from collected scraps is about 1/35 of that
for producing metal aluminum from bauxite (raw material
for aluminum production), the energy saving rate of about
97% could be achieved through recycling.
• The energy thus saved in 1985 corresponded to the
electricity consumed by about 4,660,000 households for one
75
month.

• In 2000, 16.8 billion cans were consumed in Japan.
• Of this, about 13.5 billion cans were recovered and
reutilized.
• This accounted for a recovery rate of 80.6%.
• Thus, in 17 years, Japan nearly doubled its aluminum
recycling.

76

• Japan is the second biggest producer and consumer country
of paper in the world, next to the USA. ??
• The annual per capita paper consumption in Japan was
about 185 kg about 2 decades ago.
• The introduction of office computers has increased paper
consumption all over the world.
• Consequently, the consumption of wood pulp (raw material
for paper) has also increased enormously.
• This, in turn, results in increased deforestation causing
serious loss of forest resources on the earth.
• This is well recognized that deforestation is the cause of the
so‑called "green house effect" on the global level. 77

• In such a crucial situation, the recovery and reutilization of
waste paper is expected to be very effective in preventing
wasteful use of precious forest resources.
• The recovery rate of waste paper in Japan is almost 50%,
and it is considered that about 13% (3 million tons) more
can be recovered.
• From 1 ton of waste paper, 850 kg of pulp can be produced
which is equivalent to twenty 8 m high trees with a bottom
diameter of 14 cm.
• Thus, waste paper is the forest resource lost in towns which
should be recovered and recycled.
• In 1984, a 9.6 million tons of waste paper was recovered
and reused in Japan.
78

• As an inspiring example, Clean Japan Center has been
publishing an annual booklet, using the paper produced
from the waste paper.
• Recovery of glass bottles is achieved through two ways.
• In one, the empty bottles are collected back through the
distribution routes for reutilization e.g. soft‑drinks, beer,
and milk bottles.
• In second, the throw‑away bottles are recovered and used
as raw material as "cullet" (scrap glass).
• The raw materials for bottle production are quartz, sand,
soda ash, limestone, etc.
• By adding cullet, raw materials and melting energy can be
greatly saved.
79

• In 1985, a 968,000 tons of recovered cullets accounted for
47.2% recovery rate.
• Similarly, steel cans used for canned food products are also
an important resource.
• The energy for producing the material of steel cans can be
saved by as much as 65% if recovered empty cans are used,
compared with the production from iron ores.
• A total of 30.5 million tons of scrap iron/steel was recovered
in 1984 in Japan.
Waste Exchange System
• In many cases wastes unwanted by one company may be
80
useful for another company.

• Therefore, some very effective waste recycling can be
accomplished through a waste exchange system among the
industries.
• The Clean Japan Center conducts various investigations to
gather necessary information in order to promote such
activities.

81

