EGEW 513
Solid and Hazardous Waste
Management
4. Storage, Collection, and
Transportation
Dr. Ranjna Jindal
1

Lecture Outline
• Solid Waste Storage
– On‑Site Storage

• Solid Waste Collection
– Collection Methods
– Collection Frequency
– Collection Coverage
– Collection Vehicles

• Solid Waste Transportation
– Collection Routes

• Cost of Waste Collection and Transportation

2

Solid Waste Storage
• The four core elements of any solid waste management
system are:
» storage,
» collection,
» transportation, and finally
» the treatment/disposal of the wastes

• The efficiency and effectiveness of the system depends on
each of these components.
• Compatibility (matching) between the first three steps, i.e.
storage, collection, and transport is essential to ensure
optimum operation.
3

4.1 On‑Site Storage
•

On‑site storage refers to the storage and handling of the
wastes at or near the points of generation before they are
collected and transported to the treatment/disposal
destinations.

•

On‑site storage of municipal solid wastes is of primary
importance because of its implications on handling of the
wastes during the loading operation into collection
vehicles.

•

While selecting the equipments and methods of on‑site
storage, many factors have to be considered, e.g., public
health concerns, aesthetics, environmental pollution, and
the economic situation.
4

• Public health concerns are primarily related to the
infestation of the areas used for storage of solid wastes
with flies, insects and rodents, etc., which are the potential
threats to human health.
• Aesthetic considerations are related to the odors or foul
smells, and the unsightly conditions created by the lack of
sanitary maintenance of the storage operations.
• Economics involved in the on‑site storage of wastes is the
major controlling factor for the choices to be made.
• However, the main criteria for the selection of on‑site
storage containers should be the human and environmental
safety.
5

• By far the most effective control measure for the
infestation of rodents, insects, and flies, is the proper
sanitation.
• This can be achieved through:
– the use of containers of appropriate size with tight lids;
– periodic washing and scrubbing of the containers as well as of the
storage area;
– regular use of disinfectants to spray the containers; and
– removal of wastes with reasonable collection frequency.

• On‑site solid waste storage may be classified as:
1) primary storage (or individual storage)
2) secondary storage (or communal storage)
6

1) Primary Waste Storage
• Primary waste storage refers to the storage at the
low‑volume waste sources, e.g.,
» individual homes,
» small isolated commercial premises,
» walkways in parks and other public places, and
» low‑rise residential areas with set out collection
service.

• Owners and tenants of the premises are responsible for the
containers to store their daily garbage.
• For public places, the municipal authorities provide the
refuse receptacles (waste storage containers) at the
predetermined locations.

7

• In most Asian countries a variety of receptacles are used by
individuals for primary on‑site storage within or near their
premises.
• These range from temporary containers e.g.
» paper and plastic carrier bags
» cardboard boxes

or comparatively permanent ones e.g.
» used metal or plastic tins,
» plastic buckets,
» bamboo baskets etc.

• Size of these garbage containers are usually small with a
typical capacity range of 20‑40 gallons (90‑180 liters).
8

• In Bangkok, baskets and plastic bins are used for refuse
storage in individual houses.
• In Colombo and Jakarta, improvised oil drums or similar
metal containers are used.
• Cheap, temporary kinds are used in unserviced or poorly
serviced areas and permanent kinds, in high income urban
areas.
• In many developing Asian countries, the domestic or
household wastes are still dumped into open piles on
pathways to be collected by the municipal service.
• Many of the primary waste storage facilities are not
provided with the lids and therefore are susceptible to odor
and breeding of flies.
9

• Also there are severe problems in educating public to use
proper storage containers.
• Figs 4.1-4.2 presents some typical household and other
primary on‑site waste storage containers in use in Asian
region.
• Common problems and limitations with the primary
storage containers used in most Asian countries include:
» containers are damaged over time, and degraded in
appearance and capacity;
» containers are not large enough to accommodate the
wastes causing spilling and littering of the refuse.
10

Fig 4.1 On-site primary‑storage waste containers used in Asian countries

11

Figure 4.2 On-site primary Solid Waste Storage Containers

12

2) Secondary Waste Storage
• Secondary waste storage refers to the medium to high
volume sources that might also have bulky wastes.
• These include high‑ density residential, commercial, and
industrial areas with the direct collection service through
the refuse collection trucks access; and the low‑density
rural residential areas with less frequent collection
services.
• Municipal authorities are responsible for providing the
refuse storage receptacles and selecting the locations for
placing these containers.
• Communal waste storage facilities may be either
stationary or portable receptacles.

13

• The stationary receptacles range from: depots, enclosures,
fixed bins, and concrete sections.
• The most common ones are:
>

uncovered masonry enclosures with capacities between
1‑5 cu m (1,000‑5,000 liters);

>

covered galvanized metal or masonry bins with
capacities up to 2000 liters and access for loading at the
top and unloading through a side flap door; and

>

concrete pipe sections with capacities up to 300 liters.

• All three types of facilities have been in use in the Asian
countries and have failed consistently.
14

• Often the Waste is scattered around the facilities, and
insects, rodents and animals are attracted to it.
• Except for covered bins, no protection is provided against
rain.
• However, 2000 liter drum storage is gaining popularity
and widely used in Asian countries.
• A few Asian cities have demonstrated that these drums
can be successfully used with proper management e.g.
>

>
>
>

drums being painted inside with bitumen paint;
locations carefully selected, paved and provided with
partial fencing;
quick replacement of damaged bins;
daily collection.
15

• Secondary or communal storage practices in Asian
countries need immediate attention for improvement as this
is the only way to ensure optimum waste collection.
• Only wealthier countries may be in a position to introduce
communal storage containers which are mechanically
cleared and emptied.
• Most developing countries, where even communal systems
are still far from practice in rural areas, can only afford
manual operation of communal storage facilities and locally
manufactured simple containers as a means of storage.

16

Storage of Wastes from Streets and Park Pathways
• A variety of storage receptacles are used in Asian countries
for street wastes and wastes from other public places, e.g.
walkways in parks, etc.
• These include: large size bamboo baskets, used oil drums,
metallic liter bins, and stone containers, etc.

• Larger litter bins are up to 100 liter capacity while the smaller
bins are of 30‑50 liters as shown in Fig 4.3.

• The litter bins are usually made of two parts‑the outer one of
standard design and color and a separate inner part for lifting
and emptying.
17

Figure 4.3 Litter bins

18

• There has been a tendency to recommend that primary and
secondary storage facilities should be of a surplus capacity
of:
>

at least 50% in excess when collection is daily, and

>

100% in excess for six‑days‑a‑week collection.

• This requirement, however, seems somewhat excessive
and less cost‑effective.
• More practically, except in the case of communal
containers not attended by municipal workers, a capacity
of 33% in excess for daily collection and 66% for
six‑days‑a‑week collection should be provided for both
primary and secondary storage facilities.
19

Commercial and Industrial Wastes
• Commercial and industrial wastes are generally stored in a
wide range of 90 to 15,000 liter containers.
• Bulk containers of size 4,000‑15,000 liters are more
common in the industrialized countries.
• Most of these systems are organized privately with refuse
receptacles generally being provided by contractors or the
companies themselves.

20

4.2 Source Separation
• The separation of solid waste components including
»
»
»
»
»

wastepaper,
cardboard,
aluminum cans,
glass, and
plastic containers

at the source of generation is one of the most positive and
effective ways to achieve the recovery and reuse of
materials.
• Once the waste components are separated, the question
facing the homeowner is what to do with the wastes until
they are collected or taken to local buy-back or recycling
21
center.

• Some homeowners store the separated components within
the home, periodically transferring the accumulated
wastes to larger containers.
• Other homeowners prefer to take separated waste
components and place them directly in the containers used
for the storage of these materials.

22

Solid Waste Collection and Transportation
• Collection of the solid wastes from the storage points for
transportation to the treatment/disposal sites, is the most
important component of any waste management system.
• Together, collection and transportation of wastes consume
the biggest portion of the total expenditure.
• Therefore, planning and implementation of this component
should be done with utmost care.

23

4.3 Collection Rates and Coverage
• Solid wastes in any urban or rural community that are
collected for disposal by the municipal authorities include
commingled wastes or source separated wastes.
• In many cities of Asian and other developing countries, the
municipal governments have the primary responsibility for
collection of solid wastes (MSW) but often lack the
capabilities to manage this waste.
• Failure to collect 100% of the municipal solid wastes that
are generated in any city is common.
24

• Although any ideal system aims at 100% collection of the
wastes generated, in reality it is almost impossible to
accomplish.
• The difference between the amount of residential and
commercial MSW generated may vary from city to city in
any country.
• In most Asian countries, collection rate or coverage ranges
from 60‑90% in urban areas of major cities and about
40‑50% in rural areas.
• Obtaining the actual figures is again very difficult as only
few countries keep the records of such data.
• In any developed country like USA, 85-95% collection rates
are common.
25

• Among some Asian countries, 90% of urban waste is
collected by municipal crews and private contractors in
Malaysia.
• About 71% of total waste generated in Metro Manila is
collected by government operators and about 14% by the
private collectors.
• In Thailand, both public and private services for MSW
collection are provided.
• About 80% of waste generated in most Thai cities are
collected regularly, however collection services are not as
high in rural areas.
• The remaining waste is left in areas inaccessible to
collection trucks or thrown into drains, canals, and rivers.
26

4.4 Collection Methods
• Various methods of solid waste collection are practiced in
developing countries and may be classified mainly under
four categories:
» Door‑to‑door Collection
» Block Collection
» Curbside Collection or Alley Pickup
» Communal Collection

27

1) Door‑to‑door Collection
•

As the name implies, in this method collection crew has to
collect waste from each household.

•

There are some aspects of this method to be considered in
view of the situations in developing countries.

•

Cities in most Asian countries are outgrowths of small
towns with narrow streets and crowded residential
districts.

•

This poses a number of problems e.g. difficulty in
accessibility to the premises, lack of adequate space
around the houses, etc.

•

Adoption of this method of waste collection is thus
limited to some areas in most Asian cities.

28

• In many cities, waste is collected from individual houses in
smaller, manually operated vehicles and is transferred later
to collection vehicles for hauling.
2) Block Collection
• This method of collection is used in few Asian countries e.g.
Burma, Philippines, China, and Taiwan.
• Under this system, a collection vehicle travels a
predetermined route at prescribed intervals, usually every
two to three days, and stops at selected locations and a bell
is sounded.
• Upon hearing the bell, householders bring their refuse
containers and hand them over to the crew which empties
the containers and returns them to the owners.
29

• No containers are left outside household premises or on
communal land.
• Vehicle and labor productivity of this system lies between
low to medium.
3) Curbside Collection or Alley Pickup
• In this method, the householders are responsible for placing
the refuse containers at the curb on the scheduled days,
when collection vehicle comes and the crew collects and
empties the containers in the vehicle and places them back
at the curb.
• Residents are required to take back the empty containers to
their homes.
30

• This system requires a very regular and well‑organized
collection service, so that householders know when to leave
their wastes at the curb.
• Where collection is irregular, it is common to see the refuse
containers placed permanently outside, with increased
incidence of the scattering of wastes by scavenging animals
(dogs and cats).
• Curbside collection is practiced in only high income areas
of the developing Asian countries and is not economical in
low and medium income areas.
• Another version of the curbside collection can be seen in
Asian cities in which people just throw away their trash
outside their premises from where it is collected by the
municipal street sweepers along with the street sweepings.
31

4) Communal Collection
• This is the most common mode of solid waste collection in
Asian countries.
• Under this system:
» householders discharge their wastes at the communal
storage facilities and
» refuse‑collection vehicles visit these sites at regular
intervals, usually once daily, to remove accumulated
waste.

• Theoretically, the main advantage of this collection method
is that it reduces considerably the number of collection
points and thus economizing the system.
32

4.4 Collection Frequency
• Frequency of waste collection varies not only from country
to country or city to city but also from district to district of
the same city.
• Daily collection of domestic and commercial solid wastes is
practiced in most Asian metropolitan cities.
• Some Asian countries still do not have any fixed collection
schedules.

33

4.5 Collection Vehicles
• The waste collection system includes the collection of
wastes from specific collection points e.g. community bins,
and transportation to the processing and/or disposal sites by
using refuse collection vehicles and collection crew.
• In Asian countries, a variety of refuse collection vehicles are
in use.
• In general, these vehicles can be grouped into 2 types:
(i) Vehicles which move through narrow streets and do not
travel a long distance before unloading their contents at a
transfer station, processing or disposal facility.
(ii) Vehicles which move through wider roads and travel long
distances before discharging their contents at processing or
disposal sites.

34

• In Asian countries, both types of vehicles are used.
• A combination of short distance type vehicles to transport
the wastes to the transfer stations where the load may be
discharged into another set of vehicles for long distance
hauling to the treatment/disposal facilities, gives optimum
results.
• Waste‑collection vehicles may be classified according to
four main characteristics:
>
>
>
>

power source,
vehicle body,
loading speed, and
vehicle size.
35

• A variety of power sources are available, including human
and animal power, and a large range of prime movers e.g.
three‑wheeled auto rickshaws, dumper trucks,
tractor‑trailers and conventional trucks.
• The most appropriate power source will often be
determined by many factors e.g.:

>
>
>
>
>

quantity and nature of waste,
haul distance,
road width and condition,
traffic situation, and
funds availability.

36

• Based on power source, vehicles can grouped in two
categories:
>

non‑motorized

>

motorized vehicles

which can further be divided into different types.
• Among the motorized vehicles in use in some newly
industrialized Asian countries, the various types include:
» compactor vehicles,
» non‑compaction vehicles,
» semi‑compaction vehicles, and
» container‑handling systems.
37

• Many Asian countries now practice a widespread use of
compactor vehicles in major cities.
• However, compactor trucks will prove uneconomical for
the countries where refuse densities as well as organic
contents are high.
• Figs 4.4-4.5 shows various kinds of refuse collection
vehicles used in Asian countries.

38

Collection truck with Compactor

Side loading Truck

Small truck with compactor

Large truck with compactors

Figure 4.4 Refuse collection vehicles used in Asian Countries

Side –loaded truck

Container hauling truck

Figure 4.5 Refuse collection vehicles used in Asian Countries

4.6 Manpower (Collection Crew Size)
• Collection vehicle productivity or the efficiency of
collection system is best maximized by optimizing the
collection crew size so that overall vehicle and labor cost
are minimized.
• The optimum crew size varies from city to city and from
district to district within a city.
• Factors affecting the optimum crew size include:
» physical density and layout of the area,
» method of collection and
» relative hourly costs of labor and vehicle.

• The greater the crew size, the greater will be the number
of bins emptied daily by the vehicle.
41

• However, increasing the crew size does imply increased
operational costs.
• Not only that, labor productivity has also been observed to
diminish with increase in crew size.
• Not only that, labor productivity has also been observed to
diminish with increase in crew size.
• There is, however, an optimum crew size which will
minimize overall operational costs.
• This optimum can only be established through undertaking
detailed time‑and‑motion studies for different areas.
42

• Following such a study, it will be possible to establish the
cost of labor per unit‑quantity of waste collected for
different crew sizes.
• In countries where labor is cheap and machinery expensive,
as is common in majority of Asian developing countries,
increasing crew size will usually reduce overall
waste‑collection costs.
• The usual collection crew size in Asian countries consists of
3‑4 workers, although crews of as few as 2 or as many as 8
have been observed.
• In some instances, the crew may be increased by
unauthorized individuals who participate in the collection
activity to increase the extent of material recovery.
43

• The usual situation in fact is that the collection activity is
characterized by excessive handling and use of inefficient
methods.
• The problem in countries like India and Nepal is that people
belonging to only certain specific communities carry out
this work.
• This in turn makes the system completely dependent on a
group of people.
• Therefore, any measures to improve low efficiency of these
people are often not successful.

44

4.7 Solid Waste Transportation
• Transportation of the wastes after being collected from all
collection points, is the next step which has to be planned
carefully to optimize the efficiency and economics of the
waste management system.
• The important factors to be considered include:
» road conditions used for waste transportation,
» traffic density,
» and above all, the overall haul (transport) distance.

• These factors also have determining influence on the choice
of :
» collection vehicle,
» crew size, and
» the transportation routes.

45

• There is little point in using high‑speed vehicles in
situations where haul distances are short and traffic speeds
are slow.
• The haul distance vary from city to city or from district to
district.
• Small, maneuverable and easy‑to‑load machines need to
be
compared with large, cumbersome machines but will make
few trips to the dumping site.
• The overall haul distance will also determine the need for
transfer stations to transfer wastes from small
maneuverable vehicles to large trucks, containers, rail
wagons or barges for transport to distant disposal sites. 46

• Two kinds of transportation mode are usually employed in
the Asian countries:
(1) Direct Haul
(2) Waste Transfer Stations

1) Direct Haul
• In this method wastes are directly transported from
collection points to the final disposal site.
• Generally this mode is used when the haul distance does not
exceed 20 km.
• The distance between the urban areas dumps and their
collection areas in most developing Asian countries lies
within this range.
• Non‑ compaction, semi‑compaction, and compaction
vehicles are designed to haul wastes directly.

47

2) Waste Transfer
• The transfer of collected waste from one vehicle to another
may be useful to optimize vehicle productivity and reduce
overall system costs.
• Similarly, transfer stations for temporary storage of wastes
before being transported to final disposal site can prove to
be optimum in terms of:
» cost,
» Energy,
» manpower,
» time.
48

• Generally, if the traveling time to the point of disposal is
equivalent to or larger than half the daily loading time, a
form of transfer might be justified.
• There are two basic waste‑transfer practices:
(i) short‑range transfer involving non‑motorized vehicles and
small
capacity motorized vehicles, e.g. auto‑rickshaws and dumper
trucks.
(ii) long‑range transfer involving vehicles such as conventional
refuse‑collection trucks.

49

(i) Short‑range Transfer Vehicles
•

Vehicles used for short range transfer are function of the
type of the transfer stations.

•

There are three types of short‑range transfer station,
varying in sophistication and serving different purposes.
(a) non‑containerized
(b) containerized
(c) compacting transfer stations

50

(a) Non‑containerized Transfer Stations
• This is the most primitive form of transfer station, where
waste collected in primary, short‑range vehicles is
discharged at a site, usually with a concrete floor and
enclosed.
• Subsequently, the waste is transferred to secondary,
long‑range vehicles for transportation to the disposal site.
• The transfer operation is usually undertaken manually or
with the use of a front‑end‑loader tractor.
• This form of transfer facility although still used in some
parts of Asia, is not recommended.
51

• It is excessively demanding in labor and, where front‑end
loaders are used, in capital and fuel.
• The mode of operation of transfer facility is also contrary to
the fundamental principle of solid waste management which
is to ensure that wastes never come into contact with the
ground.
(b) Containerized Transfer Station
• In this type of transfer station, waste collected in
primary‑collection vehicles is discharged directly into
containers, generally with 8‑25 m3 capacity, which are then
transported directly to the disposal site.
52

• In its simplest form, the facility consists of just one
container at a level site with adequate space for depositing a
second empty container prior to picking up a full one.
• There might be no more than a half‑wall enclosure along
the
curbside.
• Non‑motorized vehicles are productively deployed to feed
these containers, and each container covers a zone within
the settlement.
• A single vehicle or tractor shuttles between 3‑8 such
containers to the disposal site daily.
53

• The second type of containerized transfer station consists of
an enclosure on a level site, with two independent
unidirectional traffic routes for the primary and secondary
collection vehicles.
• Containers collected by primary‑collection vehicles are
deposited in the space between the vehicle routes for pick
up by a large vehicle capable of transporting a number of
such containers.
• The third type of containerized transfer station consists of
an enclosed, split‑level where primary‑collection vehicles
discharge from a platform directly into an open container
located below.
54

• Space might be allocated for one or more such
containers and a single vehicle might shuttle several
such containers to the disposal site each day.
(c) Compaction Transfer Station
• As implied by its name, the compaction‑transfer
station uses a fixed hydraulic compacting unit to
compress the waste into large containers, usually 8‑30
m3.
• This type of transfer station is only relevant for
handling low‑density refuse and, because of their
large capital cost, they are rarely cost‑ effective for
use in developing countries.
55

(ii) Long‑range Transfer
• Where the waste‑disposal site is located at a considerable
distance from the collection area (usually over 20 km),
productivity of waste‑collection vehicles and associated
labor cannot be assured without use of some form of
long‑range transfer station.
• In some circumstances, the motive behind using
long‑range
transfer stations might be to take the opportunity to use
alternative energy‑efficient secondary‑transport vehicles.

56

• There are primarily 3 types of long‑range transfer station
which can be classified, by the nature of their secondary
transport mode, as:
» road transfer stations,
» rail transfer stations, and
» barge transfer stations.

• These vehicles have a capacity of handling a minimum of
20 to 40 tons per load.

57

4.8 Collection and Transportation Routes
• Collection and transportation routes along which the
vehicles move during operations form an integral part of
the solid waste management system.
• Once the equipment and labor requirements have been
determined, collection routes must be laid out so that both
work force and equipment are used effectively and the
system's efficiency is maximized.
• One of the main problems encountered by the Asian
countries is the accumulation of the uncollected solid
wastes which is due to the decreasing collection efficiency.
58

• One way of increasing collection efficiency is to increase
the vehicle productivity to select and plan routes so that the
quantity of waste collected daily is maximized.
• In majority of the Asian countries, collection routes very
rarely are predetermined.
• On the contrary, the general practice is to leave the
make‑up of the route to the discretion of the driver or the
supervisor at the site.
• Consequently, it is not uncommon to find a truck arriving
at the disposal site only partially loaded, primarily because
of improper routing.
• This results in imbalance in cleaning schedule and also
unnecessarily increases the transportation cost.
59

• In many cases, after the collection vehicle has been
loaded to capacity or the collection route has been
covered, the trip to the disposal site is made
unnecessarily long, so as to include an opportunity to
unload a part or even most of the load for use as
animal feed or for some monetary gain from recovery of
useful materials.
• Three fundamental approaches of collection vehicle
routing are:
>

heuristic,

>

deterministic, and

>

deterministic‑heuristic methods.
60

• Steps involved in the first approach include:
>

the preparation of location maps showing waste
generation and collection points and quantities of
wastes;

>

and identification of preliminary routes which should be
updated to balance through trial and error.

• The deterministic approach relies on operations research
techniques and the development of mathematical models
incorporating relevant local data to determine the optimum
route.
• The heuristic‑deterministic approach identifies a number of
options, and then for existing constraints, the most feasible
solution is determined.
61

4.9 Cost of Collection and Transportation
• In most Asian countries, like other developing nations of the
world, the local governments always fail to assume their
basic responsibility to raise sufficient funds to provide an
acceptable level of service.
• One of the reasons is the inadequate funds made available
for solid waste management which often receives the lowest
priority among the various municipal services.
• Moreover, even the limited funds available are frequently
used to acquire inadequate and often inappropriate
collection equipment or to maintain an insufficient, obsolete
collection fleet.
62

• The absence of adequate planning and the use of
inappropriate technology have led to a serious wastage of
expenditure and effort in this direction.
• Of the total expenditure incurred in solid‑waste‑
management, 70 to 80 percent is directed towards the
collection and transportation of wastes.
• Thus, the efficiency of this sector, to a large extent, governs
the efficiency of solid waste service.
• Hence, the objective of an efficient service should be the
minimization of waste collection and transportation costs,
with the maintenance of an adequate and regular service.
63

• Because the monetary expenditure for solid waste
management services is high, even by the standards
prevailing in industrialized nations, the municipality
generally must subsidize a large percentage of the cost.
• One reason of inadequate funds is that the solid waste
cleansing tax is commonly levied as a percentage of
property tax.
• The rates are found to be quite low and a rational tariff
structure does not exist.
• The collection of taxes is normally very low mainly because
of lack of proper organization and incentives for collections.
64

• The fines for non‑payment of taxes are also very nominal
and the process for its recovery involves lengthy
procedures.
• It is now well known that the penalty for poor or inadequate
management of solid wastes in Asian cities is the high cost
of the services provided.
• Indeed, the surprisingly high cost of waste management is
due to a shortage of trained personnel and the absence of
planning
• It has also become apparent that the services are frequently
diverted to political or personal ends.
65

• The result is an increase in the labor force beyond the size
normally needed for waste management.
• There are two components of the waste collection cost:

>

labor

>

machinery

• In most Asian countries, like other developing ones, labor
is cheap and so wages are lower as compared to vehicle
cost.
• Consequently, vehicle costs predominate in overall system
costs.
66

• Therefore, optimization of vehicle productivity in
preference to labor productivity is required.
• This means that the aim of an optimum waste collection
system should be to maximize the total tonnage of waste
transported per vehicle per day in preference to the total
tonnage of waste collected per worker per day.
• Table 4.1 shows the manpower, solid waste transportation
rates i.e. quantity of wastes transported per worker per day,
and collection costs for some Asian countries.
• Table 4.2 shows the reported collection costs for some
countries.
67

Table 4.1 Solid Waste Collection Manpower and expenditure in Some Asian Countries

68

Table 4.2 Solid Waste Management Components’ Costs in Some Countries

69

