EGEW 513
Solid and Hazardous Waste
Management
8. Landfills Design & Operation
Dr. Ranjna Jindal

Lecture Outline
 Landfill Planning, Design, and Operation






Landfill Siting Considerations
Preparation of the Site for Landfilling
Landfill Layout and Design
Landfill Operations and Management
What Happens to Trash in a Landfill?

Reactions Occurring in Landfills






The Management of Landfill Gases
The Management of Leachate
Environmental Monitoring
Postclosure Care

 Concerns with the Landfilling of Solid Wastes

8.1 Landfill Planning, Design, and Operation
 For a landfill to be built, certain steps have to be followed.
 In most parts of the world, there are regulations that govern
where a landfill can be placed and how it can operate.
 The whole process begins with someone proposing the
landfill.
 In many countries, taking care of trash and building
landfills are local government responsibilities.

 Before a city or other authority can build a landfill, an
environmental impact study must be done on the
proposed site to determine:







the area of land necessary for the landfill
the composition of the underlying soil and bedrock
the flow of surface water over the site
the impact of the proposed landfill on the local
environment and wildlife
the historical or archaeological value of the proposed site

 Once the environmental impact study has been completed,
permits must be obtained from the local, state and
federal governments.

 In addition, money will have to be raised from taxes or
municipal bonds to build and operate the landfill.
 First, access roads to the landfill site must be built if they
do not already exist.
 These roads will be used by construction equipment,
sanitation services and the general public.
 After roads have been built, then the landfill can be
excavated.
 The principal elements that must be considered in the
planning, design, and operation of landfills include:

(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)

landfill sitting
preparation of the site for landfilling
landfill layout and design;
landfill operations and management;
the reactions occurring in landfills:
the management of landfill gases;
the management of leachate;
environmental monitoring; and
landfill closure and post-closure care.

 The definition sketch for landfill operations and processes is
presented in Fig. 8.1.

6

Figure 8.1 Definition sketch for landfill operations and processes
7

8.2 Landfill Siting Considerations
 One of the most difficult tasks faced by most communities
in implementing an integrated solid waste management
program is the siting of new landfills.
 Factors that must be considered in evaluating potential
sites for the long-term disposal of solid waste include:
(1) haul distance,
(2) location restrictions,
(3) available land area,
(4) site access,
(5) soil conditions and topography,
(6) climatological conditions,
(7) surface water hydrology,
(8) geologic and hydrogeologic conditions,
(9) local environmental conditions, and
(10) potential ultimate uses for the completed site.

 Final selection of a disposal site usually is based on the
results of:




a detailed site survey,
engineering design and cost studies, and
an environmental impact assessment (EIA).

(1) Haul Distance
 The haul distance is one of the important variables in the
selection of a disposal site.
 The length of the haul can significantly affect the overall
design and operation of the waste management system.
 Although minimum haul distances are desirable, other
factors must also be considered.

 Because the siting of landfills is usually determined by
environmental and political concerns, long-distance
hauling, is now becoming more routine.
(2) Location Restrictions
 Location restrictions refer to where landfills can be
located.
 Restrictions now apply with respect to siting landfills:







near airports,
in floodplains,
in wetlands,
in areas with known faults,
in seismic impact zones, and
in unstable areas

 All current restrictions must be reviewed carefully during
the preliminary siting process to avoid spending time and
money evaluating a site that will not conform with the
regulatory requirements.
(3) Available Land Area
 In selecting potential land disposal sites, it is important to
ensure that sufficient land area is available.
 Although there are no fixed rules concerning the area
required, it is desirable to have sufficient area, including
an adequate buffer zone, to operate for at least five years
at a given site.

 For shorter periods, the disposal operation becomes
considerably more expensive, especially with respect to site
preparation, provision of auxiliary facilities such as
platform scales and storage facilities, and completion of the
final cover.
 In the initial assessment of potential disposal sites, it is
important to project the extent of the waste diversion that is
likely to occur in the future and determine the impact of that
diversion on the quantity and condition of the residual
materials to be disposed of.
 For preliminary planning purposes, the amount of land area
required can be estimated as illustrated in Example 8.1.

Example 8.1 Estimation of Required Landfill Area
Estimate the required landfill area for a community with a
population of 31,000. Assume that the following conditions apply:
1. Solid waste generation rate
2. Compacted specific weight
of solid wastes in landfill
3. Average depth of compacted
solid wastes

=
=

6.4 lb/capita/d
800 lb/yd3

=

20 ft

Solution
1. Determine the daily solid wastes generation rate in tons per
day.
Generation rate =

(31,000 people) (6.4 lb / capita d )
2200 lb / ton

= 90.182 ton/d (90,182 kg/d)

2. Computationally, the required area is determined as follows:
Volume required/d

=90.182 ton / d 2200 lb / ton
800 lb / yd 3

= 248 yd3/d (190 m3/d)
Area required/yr

(248 yd 3 / d )(365 d / yr ) (27 ft 3 / yd 3 )
=
(20 ft )(43,560 ft 2 / acre)

= 2.81 acre/yr (1.14
hectare/yr)
Comment. The actual site requirements will be greater than the value
computed because additional land is required for a buffer zone, office and
service buildings, access roads, utility access, and so on. Typically, this
allowance varies from 20 to 40 percent. A more rigorous approach to the
determination of the required landfill area involves consideration of the
contours of the completed landfill and the effects of gas production and
overburden compaction .

(4) Site Access
 As the number of operating landfills continues to decrease,
new landfills that are being sited are increasing in size.
 Because land areas of suitable size are often not near
existing developed roadways and cities, construction of
access roadways and the use of long haul equipment has
become a fact of life and an important part of landfill
siting.
 Rail lines often pass nearby remote sites that are suitable
for use as landfills; thus, there is renewed interest in the
use of rail haul for transporting wastes to these remote
sites.

(5) Soil Conditions and Topography
 Because it is necessary to cover the solid wastes placed in
the landfill each day and to provide a final cover layer
after the landfilling operation is completed, data must be
obtained on the amounts and characteristics of the soils in
the area.
 If the soil under the proposed landfill area is to be used for
cover material, data must be developed on its geologic and
hydrogeologic characteristics.
 If cover material is to be obtained from a borrow pit, test
borings will be needed to characterize the material.

 The local topography must also be considered because it
will affect:




the type of landfill operation to be used,
the equipment requirements, and
the extent of work necessary to make the site usable.

 If suitable cover material is limited or an effort is being
made to extend the useful life of the landfill, it may be
necessary to consider the use of compost or other
materials for intermediate cover.

(6) Climatologic Conditions
 Local weather conditions must also be considered in the
evaluation of potential sites.
 In many locations, winter conditions will affect access to
the site.
 Wet weather may necessitate the use of separate landfill
areas.
 Where freezing is severe, landfill cover material must be
available in stockpiles when excavation is impracticable.
 Wind strength and wind patterns must also be considered
carefully.
 To avoid blowing or flying debris, windbreaks must be
established.

(7) Surface Water Hydrology
 The local surface water hydrology of the area is important
in establishing the existing natural drainage and runoff
characteristics that must be considered.
 Other conditions of flooding (e.g., the limits of the 100year flood) must also be identified.
 Because mitigation measures must be developed to divert
surface runoff from the landfill site, planners must take
great care in defining existing and intermittent flow
channels and the area and characteristics of the
contributing watershed.

(8) Geologic and Hydrogeologic Conditions
 Geologic and hydrogeologic conditions are perhaps the
most important factors in establishing the environmental
suitability of the area for a landfill site.
 Data on these factors are required to assess the pollution
potential of the proposed site and to establish what must
be done to the site to ensure that the movement of leachate
or gases from the landfill will not impair the quality of
local groundwater or contaminate other subsurface or
bedrock aquifers.
 In the preliminary assessment of alternative sites, it may
be possible to use U.S. Geological Survey maps and state
or local geologic information.
 Geologic drilling logs of nearby wells can also be used for
a preliminary assessment.

(9) Local Environmental Conditions
 Although it has been possible to build and operate landfill
sites in close proximity to both residential and industrial
developments, they must be operated very carefully if they
are to be environmentally acceptable with respect to:










traffic,
noise,
odor,
dust,
airborne debris,
visual impact,
vector control,
hazards to health, and
property values.

 To minimize the impact of landfilling operations, landfills
are now sited in more remote locations where adequate

(10) Ultimate Use for Completed Landfills
 One of the advantages of a landfill is that, once it is
completed, a sizable area of land becomes available for
other purposes.
 Because the ultimate use affects the design and operation
of the landfill, this issue must be resolved before the
layout and design of the landfill, is begun.
 Choices for the ultimate use of completed landfills are
becoming more limited by state and federal regulations
dealing with landfill closure and post closure maintenance.
 If the completed landfill is to be used for some municipal
function, a staged planting program should be initiated and
continued as portions of the landfill are completed.

8.3 Preparation of the Site for Landfilling
 The first step in the process involves the preparation of the
site for landfill construction.
 Existing site drainage must be modified to route any runoff
away from the intended landfill area.
 Rerouting of drainage is particularly important for ravine
landfills where a significant watershed may drain through
the site.
 In addition, drainage of the landfill area itself must be
modified to route water away from the initial fill area.
 Other site preparation tasks include construction of access
roads and weighing facilities, and installation of fences.

8.4 Landfill Layout and Design
 The next step in the development of a landfill is the
excavation and preparation of the landfill bottom and
subsurface sides.
 Modern landfills typically are constructed in sections.
 Working by sections allows only a small part of the
unprotected landfill surface to be exposed to precipitation at
any time.
 In addition, excavations are carried out over time, rather
than preparing the entire landfill bottom at once.
 Excavated material can be stockpiled on unexcavated soil
near the active area and the problem of precipitation
collecting in the excavation is minimized.

 Where the entire bottom of the landfill is lined at once,
provision must be made to remove stormwater runoff from
the portion of the landfill that is not being used.
 To minimize costs, it is desirable to obtain cover materials
from the landfill site whenever possible.
 The initial working area of the landfill is excavated to the
design depth, and the excavated material stockpiled for later
use.
 Vadose zone (zone between ground surface and permanent
groundwater) and groundwater monitoring equipment is
installed before the landfill liner is laid down.
 The landfill bottom is shaped to provide drainage of
leachate, and a low-permeability liner is installed.

 Leachate collection and extraction facilities are placed
within or on top of the liner.
 Typically, the liner extends up the excavated walls of the
landfill.
 Horizontal gas recovery trenches may be installed at the
bottom of the landfill, particularly if emissions of volatile
organic compounds (VOCs) from the newly placed waste
is expected to be a problem.
 To minimize the release of VOCs, a vacuum is applied and
air is drawn through the completed portions of the landfill,
 The gas that is removed must be burned under controlled
conditions to destroy the VOCs.

 Before the fill operation begins, a soil berm (heap or pile)
is constructed at the downwind side of the planned fill
area.
 The berm serves as a windbreak to control blowing
materials and as a face against which the waste can be
compacted.
 For excavated landfills, the wall of the excavation usually
serves as the initial compaction face.
Landfill Design
 A landfill's basic design parameter is capacity.
 It depends upon the area covered, the depth of the waste,
and the ratio of waste to soil or synthetic cover.
 The air space within the landfill is the volume available
into which solid waste and cover may be placed.

 The tonnage of solid waste which can be landfilled in a
given air space will increase as:
 the quantity of soil cover is reduced by:
better construction practices or
the substitution of synthetic materials, and

 the compaction of the solid waste is increased.
 Waste-to-soil ratios of 4-to-1 are common.
 Solid waste delivered to the landfill will have a density of
260 to 350 kg/m3.
 If suitable compaction equipment is employed, this waste
can be compacted to a density of 470 to 830 kg/m3 as in

8.5 Landfill Operations and Management
The Placement of Wastes
 Once the landfill site has been prepared, the next step in
the process involves the actual placement of waste material
(Figure 8.2).
 The waste is placed in cells beginning along the
compaction face, continuing outward and upward from the
face.
 The waste deposited in each operating period, usually one
day, forms an individual cell.
 Wastes deposited by the collection and transfer vehicles are
spread out in 18 to 24 “ (45 to 60 cm) layers and
compacted.

Figure 8.2 Solid wastes delivery at a landfill site

 Typical cell heights vary from 8 to 12 ft (2.4 to 3.6 m).
 The length of the working face varies with the site
conditions and the size of the operation.
 The working face is the area of a landfill where solid waste
is being unloaded, placed and compacted during a given
operating period.
 The width of a cell varies from 10 to 30 ft (3 to 9 m), again
depending on the design and capacity of the landfill.
 All exposed faces of the cell are covered with a thin layer
of soil (6 to 12 “ i.e., 15 to 30 cm) or other suitable
material at the end of each operating period.

 After one or more lifts have been placed, horizontal gas
recovery trenches can be excavated in the completed
surface.
 The excavated trenches are filled with gravel, and
perforated plastic pipes are installed in the trenches.
 Landfill gas is extracted through the pipes as the gas is
produced.
 Successive lifts are placed on top of one another until the
final design grade is reached.
 Depending on the depth of the landfill, additional leachate
collection facilities may be placed in successive lifts.
 A cover layer is applied to the completed landfill section.

 The final cover is designed to minimize infiltration of
precipitation and to route drainage away from the active
section of the landfill.
 The cover is landscaped to control erosion.
 Vertical gas extraction wells may be installed at this time
through the completed landfill surface.
 The gas extraction system is tied together and the extracted
gas may be flared or routed to energy recovery facilities as
appropriate.
 Additional sections of the landfill are constructed outward
from the completed sections, repeating the construction
steps outlined above.

 As organic materials deposited within the landfill
decompose, completed sections may settle.
 Landfill construction activities must include refilling and
repairing of settled landfill surfaces to maintain the
desired final grade and drainage.

8.6 What Happens to Trash in a Landfill?
 Trash put in a landfill will stay there for a very long time.
 Inside a truly sanitary landfill, there is little oxygen and
little moisture.
 Under these conditions, trash does not break down very
rapidly.
 In fact, when old landfills have been excavated or
sampled, 40-year-old newspapers have been found with
easily readable print.
 Landfills are not designed to break down trash, merely to
bury it.
 When a landfill closes, the site, especially the
groundwater, must be monitored and maintained for up to
30 years!

 A landfill's design life extends many years beyond the time
when it is closed.
 Waste stabilization begins shortly after it is placed in the
landfill, but will not be completed until years after closure.
 Care must be exercised to ensure that an environmental
problem does not develop during operation or after closure.
 Careful design, construction, and operation can minimize
the potential for problems arising at a landfill.

Changes in Waste Properties
Reactions Occurring in Landfills
 After solid wastes are deposited in a landfill, physical,
chemical, and biological processes modify the waste.
 Solid wastes placed in a sanitary landfill undergo a
number of simultaneous and interrelated biological,
chemical, and physical changes.

Physical Reactions
 Initial physical changes are compression as the waste is
crushed by the landfill equipment, with additional
compaction occurring as more wastes and soil are
deposited into the landfill.

 After the initial period of compaction, landfill settlement
continues slowly for many years.
 This occurs as the waste consolidates further, and
biological decomposition also reduces waste volume.
 Where good waste compaction is provided, settlement
may reduce the landfill's final depth by 15%.
 With poor compaction, settlement increases to 25%.
 Water contained within the solid waste, plus water that
enters the landfill, forms a medium for the soluble
substances to dissolve and causes the unreacted materials
to move downward as leachate.

 The quantity of leachate generated is primarily dependent
upon:
(1) the amount of precipitation falling into the landfill while it
is open;
(2) the amount of drainage through the landfill cover after it is
closed; and
(3) may be further increased by the high moisture content of
the wastes.

 Thus, the important physical changes in landfills are:


the lateral diffusion of gases in the landfill and emission
of landfill gases to the surrounding environment,



movement of leachate within the landfill and into
underlying soils, and



settlement caused by consolidation and decomposition

Chemical Reactions
 Chemical reactions taking place in a landfill mainly
involve oxygen, organic acids, and carbon dioxide-products of the decomposing waste.
 Oxidation reactions generally affect metals and are
limited by the supply of oxygen trapped in the landfill.
 Reactions between organic acids and metals result in
metallic ions and salts in the leachate.
 Carbon dioxide, after combining with water, solubilizes
calcium and magnesium and increases the hardness of
leachate.

 Thus, the important chemical reactions that occur within
the landfill include:


dissolution and suspension of landfill materials and
biological conversion products in the liquid percolating
through the waste,



evaporation and vaporization of chemical compounds
and water into the evolving landfill gas,



sorption of volatile and semivolatile organic compounds
into the landfilled material,



dehalogenation and decomposition of organic
compounds, and



oxidation reduction reactions affecting metals and the
solubility of metal salts.

 The dissolution of biological conversion products and other
compounds, particularly of organic compounds, into the
leachate is of special importance because these materials
can be transported out of the landfill with the leachate.
 These organic compounds can subsequently be released into
the atmosphere either through the soil (where leachate has
moved away from an unlined landfill) or from uncovered
leachate treatment facilities.
 Other important chemical reactions include those between
certain organic compounds and clay liners, which may alter
the structure and permeability of the liner material.
 The interrelationships of these chemical reactions within a
landfill are not well understood.

Biological Reactions
 The most important biological reactions occurring in
landfills are those involving the organic material in MSW
that lead to the evolution of landfill gases and, eventually,
liquids.
 The biological decomposition process usually proceeds
aerobically for some short period immediately after
deposition of the waste until the oxygen initially present is
depleted.
 During aerobic decomposition, CO2 is the principal gas
produced.

 Once the available oxygen has been consumed, the
decomposition becomes anaerobic and the organic matter
is converted to CO2, CH4, and trace amounts of ammonia
and hydrogen sulfide.
 Many other chemical reactions are biologically mediated
as well.
 Because of the number of interrelated influences, it is
difficult to define the conditions that will exist in any
landfill or portion of a landfill at any stated time.
 Microbial reactions in the landfill are landfill gas evolution
and leachate.

 The overall breakdown of organic matter can be represented
by the equation:
C6H1206
Biomass + Heat
(Carbohydrate)

=

CH4

(Methane)

+

CO2

(Carbon dioxide)

+
(Bacteria)

 In general, a landfill will go through three different
decomposition stages with different bacterial types
predominating in each stage.
 Figure 8.3 illustrates the changes.

Figure 8.3: Landfill stabilisation, gas and leachate production
(Source: Westlake, 1995)

Stage 1
 Solid waste initially decomposed aerobically, with carbon
dioxide, water, and nitrate the decomposition products. As
oxygen is used up, facultative and anaerobic
microorganisms predominate.
 These bacteria produce volatile acids and carbon dioxide.
 These organic acids reduce the pH to 4 or 5, which in turn
solubilizes some inorganic materials in the landfill.
 During this time, conductivity will be very high.
 The low pH is toxic to methane producing bacteria, so
little methane will be produced during this period.
 The first anaerobic stage is characterised by low pH, high
volatile acid production, high chemical oxygen demand
(COD), high conductivity, and low methane production.

Stage 2
 With time, methane producing bacteria become more
predominant (second stage anaerobic decomposition).
 These bacteria degraded the volatile acids to methane and
carbon dioxide, (at approximately a 50-50 ratio), resulting
in a rise in pH to more neutral values (7-8) and a fall in the
COD.
 With the higher pH, fewer inorganic salts are solubilized
which, combined with the decreasing volatile acid
production, results in a fall in conductivity.
 The ratio of methane to carbon dioxide depends not only on
the activity of methane-forming microorganisms in relation
to other microbial forms (primarily acid formers), but also
on the nature of the organic components of the wastes.

 For example, anaerobic decomposition of cellulosic
components results in almost equal amounts of methane and
carbon dioxide; proteins and fats produce more methane
than carbon dioxide.
 With the proportion of protein, fats, and cellulose found in
municipal solid waste, the ratio of methane to carbon
dioxide in the biogas is generally between 1.1 and 1.2.
Stage 3
 This is the maturation stage where processes from Stage 2
continue but gradually slows with decomposition.

Factors Affecting Decomposition
 Major environmental factors which affect the rate and
extent of the biochemical decomposition in the landfill are
moisture, temperature, soil cover permeability to water,
rainfall, the degree of resistance of the wastes to bacterial
attack, and solid waste processing before landfilling.
 Moisture is an essential factor for bacterial survival.
 An ideal moisture content is one that approaches
saturation; however, it can be a limited factor for the
biological reaction if it drops below 40%.
 Below 20%, decomposition essentially ceases.

 The amount of moisture in the landfill will depend upon
rainfall and the landfill cover's resistance to infiltration.
 Processing of the waste (shredding, for example) will
enhance decomposition conditions.

Component Analysis
 Individually, the components of municipal solid waste go
through the following changes in a landfill:
Metals:
 Metals remain in landfill as inert or relatively inert
compounds unless soil is eroded by surface runoff.
 They may leach to groundwater such as:




sulfates of calcium and magnesium;
bicarbonates of iron, calcium and magnesium;
oxides of tin, zinc, and copper.

Plastics:
 Plastics are essentially inert.

Cloth, Natural and Synthetic:
 These remain as an inert or relatively inert materials.
 They may be oxidized and reduced (minerals in natural
fibers), or may remain by incorporating into microbial
protoplasm as ammonia, carbon, phosphorus, and
potassium.
 Cloth products:
 may leach out of the groundwater as:
carbon dioxide,
ketones,
organic acids,
sulfates
phosphates,

 or they may escape into the atmosphere as:
carbon dioxide,
methane,
volatile acids,
nitrogen,
ammonia,
hydrogen sulfide, and
mercaptans.

Rubber, Natural and Synthetic:
 Synthetic rubber remains essentially inert.
 Natural rubber breaks down extremely slowly.
Glass:

Wood, Garbage, and Paper :
 Wood may:
 leach to groundwater as:
 carbon dioxide,
 ketones,
 organic acids,
 phenol,
 ammonium,
 nitrites, and
 nitrates;

 or remains in landfill through incorporation into microbial
protoplasm as:
ammonium,

 may escape into atmosphere as:
carbon dioxide,
methane,
volatile acids,
nitrogen, and
ammonia.

Unclassified:
 Unclassified material remain relatively inert.
 Ashes in fill may leach soluble minerals to groundwater.

8.7 The Management of Landfill Gases
 Landfill gas movement and emissions are particularly
important considerations in landfill management.
 As gas is evolved within a landfill, internal pressure may
build, causing the landfill cover to crack and leak.
 Water entering the landfill through the leaking cover may
enhance the gas production rate, causing still more
cracking.
 Escaping landfill gas may carry trace carcinogenic and
teratogenic compounds into the surrounding environment.
 Because landfill gas usually has a high methane content,
there may be a combustion and/or explosion hazard.

Gas Production
 The amount of the gas production depends on the extent
and rate of decomposition.
 The ultimate gas yield has an estimated gas composition
by volume of 51% methane and 49% carbon dioxide.
 Due to less than ideal conditions in a landfill, the observed
gas yields are about 100 cubic metres per tonne of waste.
 It is evident from Figure 8.3 that once waste has become
methanogenic, the major gases present in landfill gas are
methane and carbon dioxide; these gases typically make
up 50-60% (v/v) and 30-40% (v/v) landfill gas
respectively.

 Other 'bulk' components of landfill gas (those gases
measured at percentage levels) include hydrogen, oxygen
and nitrogen.
 The relative proportion of these gases, together with key
trace components often falls within a range that is
characteristic of gases from different sources, and can
help to identify the source of migrating gas.
 Both methane and hydrogen are flammable in the
presence of oxygen and are therefore potentially
explosive if ignition occurs within a confined
environment.
 Methane is flammablc in air within the range 5-15% by
volume while hydrogen is flammable within the range
4.1-75%.

 However, except in the early stages of waste stabilisation
when the concentration can reach levels of approximately
20% (v/v), hydrogen is seldom present within landfill gas
at levels within the explosive range.
 The exact values for the upper explosive limit (U.E.L) and
lower explosive limit (L.E.L) for methane may vary
according to the concentration of other bulk components
such as carbon dioxide and nitrogen, but for most
purposes, the flammable range 5-15% (v/v) is recognized
and is the basis upon which methane gas control levels
have been set.

 In addition to the hazards associated with the major 'bulk'
gases the minor trace components may also exert a
deleterious impact upon the environment and upon
human health.
 Many of the trace compounds in landfill gas are
recognised toxicants when present in air at concentrations
which exceed recognised toxicity threshold limit values
(TLV's) or the Occupational Exposure Standards (OESs)
set by the Health and Safety Executives.
 Anyone coming into contact with landfill gas is therefore
potentially at risk from the toxic nature of the minor
components.

Gas Migration
 The migration of landfill gas will affect the environment in
a number of ways, the most significant of which are likely
to be:


the contribution to atmospheric methane emissions and



the explosion hazard caused by accumulation of
migrating gas within enclosed spaces.

8.8 The Management of Leachate
 Leachate migration is another concern.
 As leachate migrates downward in the landfill, it may
transfer compounds and materials to new locations where
they may react more readily.
 Leachate occupies pore spaces in the landfill and in doing
so may interfere with the migration of landfill gas.
Leachate Production
 Leachate which reaches the base of the landfill may seep
into the ground.
 If leakage does occur, an underlying groundwater aquifer
may be contaminated.

 The extent of contamination will depend upon the
permeability of the soil formation.
 Leakage into a porous formation may result in a large area
being contaminated.
 In the past, many landfills were not lined.
 Due to groundwater protection concerns, liners are being
installed at the base of most new landfills to control and
collect the leachate.
 Some inorganic materials will still be solubilized into the
leachate by decomposition occurring during the second
stage, so the fall in conductivity will not be as drastic as the
fall in COD.

 Landfill leachate is hazardous by virtue of the high BOD
and COD content and the toxicity of dissolved organic and
inorganic chemicals.
 If allowed to enter streams and other watercourse's,
aerobic metabolism of the compounds that make up the
BOD and COD by plant life and microorganisms can
remove the majority of dissolved oxygen present within
the water converting the watercourse to eutrophic state in
which fish and other animal life cannot survive.
 Hazards due to other organic and inorganic solutes will
vary according to the nature of the leachate.
 But the heavy metals and ammonia which are present in
most leachates are recognized as the most common toxic
components.

 Even when present at the relatively low levels, heavy metals
may prove hazardous if they are bio-accumulated through
the feeding chain.

8.9 Environmental Monitoring
 Upon completion of all fill activities, the landfill surface is
repaired and upgraded with the installation of a final cover.
 The site is landscaped appropriately and prepared for other
uses.
 Landfill closure is the term used to describe the steps that
must be taken to close and secure a landfill site once the
filling operation has been completed.

 Environmental monitoring involves the activities,
associated with collection and analysis of water and air
samples, that are used to monitor the movement of landfill
gases and leachate at the landfill site.

8.10 Postclosure Care
 Postclosure care refers to the activities associated with the
long-term monitoring and maintenance of the completed
landfill (typically 30 to 50 years).
 Monitoring and maintenance of the completed landfill
must continue by law for some time after closure (30 to 50
years).

 It is particularly important:






that the landfill surface be maintained and repaired to
enhance drainage,
that gas and leachate control systems be maintained and
operated, and
that the pollution detection system be monitored .

 Occasionally, leachate may seep through weak point in the
covering and come out on to the surface.
 It appears black and bubbly (Figure 8.4).
 Later, it will stain the ground red.
 Leachate seepages are promptly repaired by excavating the
area around the seepage and filling it with well-compacted
soil to divert the flow of leachate back into the landfill.

Figure 8.4 Seepage of leachate (black) can be seen through
a weak spot in the cover

Groundwater Monitoring
 At many points surrounding the landfill are groundwater
monitoring stations.
 These are pipes that are sunk into the groundwater (Figure
8.5) so water can be sampled and tested for the presence of
leachate chemicals.
 The temperature of the groundwater is measured.
 Because the temperature rises when solid waste
decomposes, an increase in groundwater temperature
could indicate that leachate is seeping into the
groundwater.
 Also, if the pH of the groundwater becomes acidic, that
could indicate seeping leachate.

Figure 8.5 A groundwater monitoring pipe stands in the center.
The two yellow markers on either side make it more
visible so that equipment operators will not run into the
monitoring station.

The Life of a Modern Landfill
 The development of a modern landfill is illustrated in Figure
8.6.

Excavation and
installation of
landfill liner

Placement of
solid waste in
landfill

Cutaway
through
completed
landfill
Figure 8.6 Development and completion of a solid waste landfill

8.11 Concerns with the Landfilling of Solid
Wastes
 Concerns with the landfilling of solid waste are related to:
(1)
the uncontrolled release of landfill gases that might
migrate
off-site and cause odor and other potentially dangerous
condition,
(2)
the impact of the uncontrolled discharge of landfill gases
on
the greenhouse effect in the atmosphere,
(3)
the uncontrolled release of leachate that might migrate
down to
underlying groundwater or to surface waters,
(4) the breeding and harboring of disease vectors in improperly
managed landfills, and
(5)
the health and environmental impacts associated with the
release of the trace gases arising from the hazardous materials

